

# SIDA

## Will the money reach its intended destination and with what impact?

*Originally Published for OpenHack@Malmö2015*

### Author:
Erik Vågberg,<br>
Programme manager – Specialist, Humanitarian Unit,<br>
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA),<br>
http://www.sida.se/

### About
This rather simple question becomes quite complex when you consider that the money itself does not do much good if you stand with a bag of money in your hand in the middle of an earthquake disaster or flood where everything is destroyed and there is nothing to buy for the money.

Let us therefore begin to look at some of our issues and challenges when it comes to us on SIDA to ensure that aid is delivered:

### Background
SIDA is a financier of humanitarian assistance implemented by the United Nations, other agencies and NGOs. We don’t carry out any humanitarian aid itself, but rather act through partners. SIDA analyzes the needs of the various crises in the world and distributes money as the Swedish government assigns us annually. SIDA obviously want the money to be enough for as much help as possible and help as many people as possible, and especially to reach those who need help the most. As an information resource, we have the Global Humanitarian System, which annually makes an analysis of all the world’s crises and publish reports on the needs (about the middle of December each year). These reports help us to decide how we should target our money. For rapidly evolving crises flash appeals are compiled where the UN or the Red Cross asks for additional money and resources for relief.

When financing decisions have been taken in regards to which crises and projects to target the challenge begins.

Crisis areas are very difficult and dangerous to work in. If it’s been an earthquake all the infrastructure may be destroyed and affected people need everything from shelter to food, water, toilets, clothing, medical care and school. If roads and bridges are destroyed, it can be difficult to both gain an understanding and to analyze how great the need is, but also problems to deliver supplies to the scene.

Other types of disasters include droughts and failed harvests. In such situations the disaster arrives slowly, and there is in theory a long time to prepare. Unfortunately, we see that although it is possible to predict that there will be food shortages, assistance systems do not react in the time and people are without food and supplies and may have to leave their homes and lands in search of a place far away where they can get help from starvation, malnutrition, and access to clean water, medical care and shelter.

A third type of disasters are tropical storms. There you have some deadline that it is possible to act before the crisis strikes. The hard part which is to reach out to all who may be affected, to warn about the risk and then also plan so that the devastation of the disaster will be as small as possible. In countries where disasters like these are prone to happen, they learn to build safer conditions, but also to develop warning systems to reach out with information. Despite this, the devastation can still be great if a severe storm hits, and reconstruction efforts difficult and costly.

War and conflict is perhaps the greatest cause of disasters at present. War makes people leave their home, work and school to seek safety beyond the violence, bullets and rockets. Although international law says that civilians shall not become victims of war and never denied humanitarian aid during the hostilities, it is in fact very dangerous for aid workers to reach civilians in need to get a picture of the needs and deliver relief supplies. Security and safety is an important issue both for the crisis affected population and humanitarian workers in conflict areas.

One aspect that is important for us in SIDA is that you must not make a difference between people, the help should go to those most in need and be adapted to the victims’ needs. It is important that women and men are supported equally, and that the support for women is tailored precisely to their real needs. Further, it may not matter what nationality, religion or ethnic group you belong to in order to get help. Also, special needs of for example children, older and disabled people must be taken into account when planning and implementing relief efforts.

Environmental issues are a central part of both the disaster and reconstruction work. A disaster can generate tons of hazardous debris, especially if it affects industry, nuclear power plants, hospitals or mines. After a disaster in urban areas electricity, water and sewage may become completely or partially destroyed and waste disposal totally broken down. In just a few days after a tropical storm or an earthquake, victims may be struck by a further disaster, a debris and garbage disaster, with the risk of epidemics and poisoning as consequence.

### Challenge

Something that is more and more discussed is to provide greater opportunity for crisis and disaster victims themselves to describe their needs, and then also be given a chance to speak up about the help they have received. We also talk about how emergencies and disasters can be prevented and how the effects of crises and disasters can be reduced once they have occurred so that the society can quickly return to normal. Traditionally, most attention is focused on the material damage and physical injuries of victims of accidents, but the psychological damage and long-term effects of traumatic experiences in war and disaster is a thematic area that gets more and more attention. It is common that violence against women and rape are increasing in war and disaster situations, children left alone or are forced to become soldiers, and that conflicts and violence between people increases when society is suffering a crisis.

The method SIDA uses to follow up so that the money we allocate to disaster aid reaches the needy, are reports written by our partner organizations, independent audits of finances, studies, evaluations and our own field visits. Deficiencies in safety and difficulty arranging transportation to disaster areas, makes it sometimes almost impossible to verify that the aid has arrived, and that all those in need received help. We must rely on second and third hand information in the reports because we ourselves neither can nor may travel to the disaster area. In an emergency situation it may be difficult to get receipts for goods and services you buy and the chaotic situation means that there is often a risk of bribery, intimidation and blackmail becoming part of the everyday lives of aid workers. Cultural differences between those who come to offer help and those affected by a disaster can sometimes create problems, as well as language problems that make communication more difficult. Most often the help need to come into place quickly, very quickly, to be at all useful.

Something you see more and more, even in the most resource-constrained areas of the world, is that mobile phones and smart-phones are relatively common among refugees and even among the really poor. Refugees and disaster stricken populations organize themselves often in committees and appoints representatives to speak for the group. This can be excellent for finding out the needs and reach out to help, but it can also do that not everyone gets a say and that misunderstandings arise. Satellite imagery and infrared cameras have sometimes been used to obtain information and collating mode images and drones are also likely to have helped to transport the medicine to remote health clinics when the roads were not passable.

### Goal

How can we verify that the money/aid has reached its intended destination and know what impact it actually has had?
