# BIGHEART

## A universal framework for charity organizations to report back to their individual donors with information on how their money was used and what results it gave.

*Originally Published for OpenHack@Lund2016*

### Hackathon projects addressing challenge
* Ant-Bears - [OpenHack 2016 in Lund](../Hackathons/2016_Lund/2016_Lund_Summary.md)
* Charity-Q - [OpenHack 2016 in Lund](../Hackathons/2016_Lund/2016_Lund_Summary.md)
* Mechanical Heart - [OpenHack 2016 in Lund](../Hackathons/2016_Lund/2016_Lund_Summary.md)
* CharityMatch - [OpenHack 2016 in Lund](../Hackathons/2016_Lund/2016_Lund_Summary.md)

### Author
Jakob Gelberg,<br>
CEO, <br>
BIGHEART,<br>
http://bghrt.se/

### Brief description
A universal framework for charity organizations to report back to their individual donors with information on how their money was used and what results it gave.

### Background
BIGHEART is providing modern digital tools to make charity donations available for more people and to improve the overall experience of all involved stakeholders.
One of the main reasons why people are not donating to charity is because they can’t afford. Our smartphone app makes it possible for individuals to donate more than 100 SEK to charity every month by seeing ads and offers on their lock screens, without taking money from their own pockets.

Another of the main reasons why people are not donating money is because lack of transparency and feedback regarding how their money was used. BIGHEART aim to solve this by developing a universal framework in which charity organizations can report back to individual donors based on where and when they donated their money. We believe that Open Source is the best tool for this solution.

### Challenge
The big challenge with reporting back to individual donors is the administrative efforts that it takes. These are the main challenges we have identified:
* The organizations can’t trace the donations backwards to the individual donor
* The organizations can’t identify the specific effect and results generated by the individual donations
* The organizations don’t have a framework in which they can report results from various projects in a predetermined universal format to the donors that has contributed to the projects.

To solve these problems we need a traceable system where donations can be followed from start to end and also a universal reporting system in which the organizations can present the results generated in specific projects. The organizations, departments, accounts, projects and sub-projects has to be ordered in a clear hierarchical system in which donations can be associated to. Every donation that is associated with any specific group in the hierarchy is entitled to get a report from this group. This has to be simplified and approximate in order to provide the individual donor with a simple and clear report that is not presenting every details, but the overall image.

### Goals
The goal of developing a solution for this issue is to provide a tool that every charity organization will use to report their results internally and externally no matter the source of the donation. In the long run this will create more trust for the organization which will increase their overall collection of donations. It will also engage the donors by giving them personal feedback and encourage them to donate more. The tool will be applicable to all sources of donation and flexible to fit every organizations way of working. It will also be possible to integrate to any digital tool that is used for collecting charity donations.

### End-user
The tool will be used and operated by the charity organizations and presented to the individual donors. It has therefore two end users to satisfy in different ways.

### Requirements
The format of the reporting system has to be predetermined in order to provide consistent reports, but with room for customizations to fit specific conditions of different projects. Both ends of the hierarchical tracing system has to be universal and integrateable to different tools/systems/platforms. One end is where the user gets the report and the other end is where the organizations generate the reports.
