# Individuell Människohjälp (IM) - Swedish Development partner

*Originally Published for OpenHack@Gothenburg2017*

### Hackathon projects addressing challenge

### Author
Sofia Emanuelsson, <br>
Development officer,<br>
Individuell Människohjälp (IM) - Swedish Development partner,<br>
https://manniskohjalp.se/

### Brief description
In this challenge we would like you to explore the feasibility for a new concept of a ”digital meeting point” with a special focus on IM’s study circle “To work in Sweden” that aims to facilitate the entry of newly arrived migrants into the Swedish labor market.

### Background
M supports the integration of adults and young people arriving in Sweden by organizing meetings with volunteers to exchange experiences, share knowledge, and build networks. IM engages around 7000 members in Sweden and
2000 volunteers to support our cause.

We are aware of an ongoing change when it comes to volunteering and engaging in civil society member-based organizations and we have identified a need for presenting a wider offering for volunteering. The physical meeting point where you for example meet up every Thursday at 4.30-6 suits many of our volunteers, but not everyone. We know that there are many more who want to invest their time in our cause, but who can’t fit our activities into a busy
schedule.

We think that we could organize even more volunteers, resulting in a greater impact on integration and society as a whole. Those unable to become involved in our activities for personal or professional reasons could be offered a digital alternative so they can take part in IM’s activities.

IM has offered job-related integration activities in Göteborg since 2015 through different methods. These include workshops for youths and adults, study circles and training courses in entrepreneurship lead by volunteers and professionals. We think that we can engage more job-active people in our activities with a digital meeting place. This can allow active, engaged and busy people to make a difference whenever they have time, such as late at night or during the weekends.

The idea is for volunteers to offer an “on-demand” - online support (using chat and/or email) for newly arrived migrants and others with a foreign background. They can be on standby to give feedback on CVs, personal letters and help create elevator pitches. They can also help by preparing people for job interviews, sharing contacts, and building networks and by sharing other useful job related tips and advice.

A resource library with links to good examples of how to compose a CV and personal letter might be an interesting component but the focus is mainly on live interaction between volunteers and newly arrived migrants looking for jobs in Sweden.

The platform might also involve links to companies and other organizations wishing to publish adverts about vacancies and internships as a way of getting in touch with interesting candidates.

It is important that the digital platform is easy to manage and support.

As a second step the digital platform might be extended to connect with other networks working towards the same goal as IM. For example, in the Opportunity Guide by Opportunity Day http://opportunityday.se/opportunity-guide/

### Challenge
In Sweden we work with shedding light on and strengthening the voices of people who are excluded. Racism, discrimination and flaws in the assistance that newly arrived migrants receive, can lead to exclusion and vulnerability among people born outside of Sweden. In this group the unemployment rate is much higher than among native Swedes. In Sweden, IM focuses on integration and engagement. We want to improve the opportunities for people to
become included in society, and at the same time fight exclusion. Our work is about encounters between people.

IM believes in a strong civil society and therefore encourages voluntary work. We have local offices in Gothenburg, Malmö, Stockholm, Umeå and Vrigstad with more extensive activities, but the organization is represented in other parts of Sweden too.

See more information on our webpage about the integration activities we offer as well as our campaign ”The New Country” - about perspectives on integration; https://manniskohjalp.se/ims-integrationsarbete https://manniskohjalp.se/integrationya-landet

### Goals
Our goal for the future with this challenge is to create a well-functioning digital, voluntary-based meeting place for the exchange of knowledge and experience, tips and advice that facilitate the entry of newly arrived migrants in the Swedish labor market.

We also hope that this challenge will enhance cooperation between us and other players working towards integration of newly arrived migrants to the Swedish labor market and in society in general. In addition, we hope that it will serve as a model for other IM activities, resulting in more digital opportunities for IM volunteers and practically anyone wanting to contribute their time through engagement in a civil society.

### End-user
Newly arrived migrants and others with a foreign background, volunteers as well as companies, organizations and networks and other actors on the Swedish labor market.

### Optional requirements/criteria
In Swedish (as language is key to the labor market in most cases).
